---
title: "Computing the Wigner 3j, 6j, and 9j Symbols Efficiently"
author: "Thomas (Tom) C. Gorordo"
published: false

bibliography: "files/posts/2026-02-16-wigner.bib"
---

As a test post, here's a transcription of some old notes I have laying around from writing an 
[`add9j` PR](https://github.com/tgorordo/WignerSymbols.jl)
for [`Jutho/WignerSymbols.jl`](https://github.com/Jutho/WignerSymbols.jl) 
(yet to be upstreamed).

The focus here is on laying out a practical strategy for computation of the symbols 
- omitting any discussion of what the symbols are/where exactly they come from - 
and so many properties will simply be cited as facts about arrays of numbers rather than 
explained in terms of the intertwinings of spin representation products.
(The full representation-theoretic story of the symbols is
beautiful - so maybe I'll make a post on that someday, but that's not this post).

## Wigner Symbol Formulae

The Wigner \(3x\text{j}\) symbols are all exactly reducible to a number of the form

\[W_{3x} = \frac{n\sqrt{s}}{q}\hspace{1cm} n,s,q\in\mathbb{Z}\]

So, if one can use exact integer arithmetic in computing the three integer components,
a computer implementation of the symbols should at-worst incur typical floating point root
and ratio errors. Further, if we use formulae that involve only sums of binomials/ratios 
of factorials then we'll find that the integer arithmetic involved can be optimized using 
some prime factorization representation tricks [@joforFastEval] (more on this below).

This requires we use formulae that are amenible to such manipulations:

Let 
\(\delta(j_1, j_2, j_3) = (j_1 \leq j_2 + j_3)\land (j_2 \leq j_1 + j_3)\land (j_3 \leq j_1 + j_2)\land(j_1 + j_2 + j_3\in\mathbb{Z})\)
for \(j_i\in\frac{1}{2}\mathbb{Z}\) a half-integer be called the "triangle condition". Also, define the convenience function:
\[\Delta^2(a, b, c) = \frac{(a+b-c)!(a-b+c)!(b+c-a)!}{(a+b+c+1)!}\]
where we'll repeatedly make use of \(\Delta(a, b, c) = \sqrt{\Delta^2(a, b, c)}\).

### \(3\text{j}\) Formula
Then the \(3j\) symbol can be calculated as:

\[\begin{pmatrix} j_1 & j_2 & j_3 \\
		  m_1 & m_2 & m_3
  \end{pmatrix} = \begin{cases} 0 \hspace{1em}\text{if}\ \ \delta(j_1,j_2,j_3)\lor(m_1+m_2+m_3 \neq 0) &  \\
	(-1)^{j_1 - j_2 - m_3} \times\Delta(j_1, j_2, j_3) \\
	\hspace{1em}\times\sqrt{(j_1-m_1)!(j_1+m_1)!(j_2 - m_2)!(j_2+m_2)!(j_3-m_3)!(j_3+m_3)!} \\
	\hspace{1em}\times \sum_{k=K}^N (-1)^k /S(k) \hspace{2em} \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
\]
where the terms of the numerator sum have denominator 
\[\begin{split} S(k) &= k!(j_1+j_2-j_3-k)!(j_1-m_1-k)! \\
	&\ \times(j_2+m_2-k)!(j_3-j_2+m_1+k)!(j_3-j_1-m_2+k)!\end{split}\]
and the sum ranges from the initial \(K=\max(0, j_2-j_3-m_1, j_1-j_3+m_2)\) to a final \(N=\min(j_1+j_2-j_3, j_1-m_1, j_2+m_2)\)


### \(6\text{j}\) Formula
Meanwhile, the \(6j\) symbol can be computed via:

\[\begin{Bmatrix} j_1 & j_2 & j_3 \\
		  j_4 & j_5 & j_6
  \end{Bmatrix} = \begin{cases} 0\hspace{1em}\text{if}\ \ 
	\delta(j_1,j_2,j_3)\land\delta(j_1,j_6,j_5)\land\delta(j_2,j_4,j_6)\land\delta(j_3,j_4,j_5) 
& \\ \\
\Delta(j_1,j_2,j_3)\Delta(j_1,j_5,j_6)\Delta(j_2,j_4,j_6)\Delta(j_3,j_4,j_5) \\
\hspace{1em}\begin{split}\times\sum_{k=K}^N (-1)^{k}(k+1)! &{\huge/} (k-j_1-j_2-j_3)!(k-j_1-j_6-j_5)! \\
						&\ \times(k-j_2-j_4-j_6)!(k-j_3-j_4-j_5)! \\
						&\ \times(j_1+j_2+j_4+j_5-k)! \\
						&\ \times(j_1+j_3+j_4+j_6-k)! \\
						&\ \times(j_2+j_3+j_5+j_6-k)!\end{split}
&\text{otherwise}\end{cases}
\]
(with all those factorials in the denominators!) where the sum ranges from 
\(K=\max(j_1 + j_2 + j_3, j_4 + j_5 + j_3, j_1 + j_5 + j_6, j_4 + j_2 + j_6)\) 
to 
\(N=\min(j_1 + j_2 + j_4 + j_5, j_1 + j_3 + j_4 + j_6, j_2 + j_3 + j_5 + j_6)\).

### \(9\text{j}\) Formula
The \(9j\) formula has a few additional pieces [@wei9jFormula], but can be computed
in these terms as:

\[\begin{split}\begin{Bmatrix} j_1 & j_2 & j_3 \\
		  j_4 & j_5 & j_6 \\
		  j_7 & j_8 & j_9
  \end{Bmatrix} &= \Delta(j_1,j_2,j_3)\Delta(j_4,j_5,j_6)\Delta(j_7,j_8,j_9) \\
		&\ \ \times\Delta(j_1,j_4,j_7)\Delta(j_2,j_5,j_8)\Delta(j_3,j_6,j_9) \\
		&\ \times\sum_{k=K}^N (-1)^{2k} (2k+1) 
			\begin{bmatrix} j_1 & j_2 & j_3 \\ j_6 & j_9 & k\end{bmatrix}
			\begin{bmatrix} j_6 & j_4 & j_5 \\ j_8 & j_2 & k\end{bmatrix}
			\begin{bmatrix} j_8 & j_9 & j_7 \\ j_1 & j_4 & k\end{bmatrix}
\end{split}
\]
where the sum begins at \(K=\max(|j_8-j_4|,|j_2-j_6|,|j_1-j_9|)\) and ends
at \(N=\min(j_8+j_4,j_2+j_6,j_1+j_9)\).
The Wei square brackets in the sum are defined purely in terms of the usual binomial 
coefficients (\(\binom{a}{b} = \frac{a!}{b!(a-b)!}\))

\[\begin{split}\begin{bmatrix} m_1 & m_2 & m_3 \\
		  m_4 & m_5 & m_6
  \end{bmatrix} = \sum_{n=P}^{Q} (-1)^n &\binom{n+1}{n-m_1-m_5-m_6}\binom{m_1+m_5-m_6}{n-m_2-m_4-m_6} \\
			&\ \times\binom{m_1-m_5+m_6}{n-m_3-m_4-m_5}\binom{-m_1+m_5+m_6}{n-m_1-m_2-m_3}
\end{split}
\]
where these sums begin at \(P=\max(m_1+m_5+m_6, m_2+m_4+m_6, m_3+m_4+m_5, m_1+m_2+m_3)\) 
and finalize at \(Q=\min(m_1+m_2+m_4+m_5,m_1+m_3+m_4+m_6,m_2+m_3+m_5+m_6)\)


There's probably fun to be had manipulating these expressions further using techniques
like those in [@GKPConcreteMathematics2e], but I'll leave them as-is.

## Tricks and Tabulation
We can use that these formulae are all sums (of sums) of ratios of factorials to optimize
the integer arithmetic required in evaluating them. Representing the (potentially large)
factorials encountered as prime factorizations will allow us to reduce the ratios by an
LCD and extract common factors from sums to shrink the size of the arithmetic a big 
integer implementation will need to handle (especially avoiding large cancellations
in the sums).

This works especially well because prime factorizations of factorials are conveniently
obtained recursively. Thus, easy to tabulate and re-use to reduce the overall
cost of evaluating many factorials.

### Euclid's Lemma and Prime Factorizations of Factorials
The crux of the trick for re-using factorials is Euclid's lemma:

> *If \( p | ab\) for prime \(p\), then \(p|a\) or \(p|b\).*

> *\(\implies\) If prime \(p|n!\) then \(p|k\) for \(k\leq n\) one of the factors.*

More specifically, *Legendre's Theorem* says that:

\[\sharp_p(n!) = \sum_{k=1}^n \sharp_p(k) = \sum_{k=1}^{\lfloor\log_p(n)\rfloor} \lfloor\frac{n}{p^k}\rfloor\]

where \(\sharp_p(k)\) gives the number of times $p$ divides \(k\). Clearly,
\(\sharp_p(n!) \geq \sharp_q(n!)\) if \(p < q\) are primes.

This implies that a tabulation of factorials which has \(\sharp_p(n!)\) cached, need only find \(\sharp_p(n+1)\) (e.g. by trial-division)
and add in order to compute \(\sharp_p((n+1)!)\).

### 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, 37, 41, 43, . . .

We can then think of a prime factorization as a vector of powers together with a sign,
something like (pseudocode):
```.julia
PrimeFactorization{U <: UnSigned} <: Integer
	pows::Vector{U}
	sign::Int8 # or Bool, whatever
end
```
e.g. \(7! = 5040 = 2^4\times 3^2\times 5\times 7 \longleftrightarrow ([4, 2, 1, 1], +1)\)
or another e.g. \(-11 \longleftrightarrow ([0,0,0,0,1],-1)\), etc.

Notice that \(\sqrt{}\)s will be procedurally convenient in this form: reduce the even 
powers & move the odd ones under the radical.
e.g. 

\(\sqrt{7!} = \sqrt{2^4\times 3^2\times 5\times 7} 
= 2^2\times 3 \times \sqrt{5\times 7}\)


Likewise (via lcd, gcd) division, multiplication,
and factorization are all also convenient. Addition/subtraction less so - requiring
conversion to BigInt, performing the operation, and then subsequently factorizing.

## Evaluation Procedure
So here's the broad procedure for computing a symbol:

1. Compute the squared triangle coefficients \(\Delta^2(a,b,c)\) which
	make a prefactor of the integer component under the radical. 
	Use prime factorization to reduce
	ratios, storing an exact ratio for the radical and plain parts of \(\Delta(a,b,c)\).

2. Multiply the ratio part by the result of computing the summation factor.
	Internal to that factor:
	a) Initialize an array for the terms of the sum from the known range.
	b) Compute each term using prime factorization, store.
	c) Reduce to a common denominator & extract any common factors from the array.
	d) Compute the remaining sum of the array with BigInt arithmetic
		and multiply by any extricated prefactors.

The \(9j\) symbols have a bit of an extra complication in that they require a nested
summation (for the Wei brackets), leading to essentially a nested repetition of (2) as-needed.

## Symbol Cacheing
Applications of the symbols frequently re-use symbols extensively so it's also worthwhile 
to cache the symbols themselves (in addition to our caching of factorial factorizations).
Doing so efficiently involves exploiting their symmetries - ideally we cache unique
symbols and catch whenever a symbol is identical (up to something like a sign) to a
previously computed symbol.

The \(3j\) and \(6j\) have explicit indexing schemes [@raschyuEffStorage] which can be
used to this effect, but it's also enough to establish a canonical form. 
We'll see that the \(9j\) do not have so nice a cacheing strategy - the symmetries are 
underconstraining and any canonicalization is at-best equivalent in cost to a brute-check 
against all the symmetries.

### Regge Symmetries
The symmetries of the Wigner symbols can be expressed as permutation symmetries of 
Regge symbols -- specific arrays built from the symbol entries [@raschyuEffStorage].

For the \(3j\) symbol, the Regge symbol is \(3\times 3\)
\[\begin{pmatrix} j_1 & j_2 & j_3 \\ m_1 & m_2 & m_3 \end{pmatrix}
\longrightarrow \begin{bmatrix} -j_1 + j_2 + j_3 & j_1 - j_2 + j_3 & j_1 + j_2 - j_3 \\
j_1 - m_1 & j_2 - m_2 & j_3 - m_3 \\ j_1 + m_1 & j_2 + m_2 & j_3 + m_3 \end{bmatrix}\]
The symmetries of the Wigner symbol correspond to the row, column, and transpose \((3! \times 3! \times 2 = 72)\) permutations of the array.

The \(6j\) has a \(3\times 4\) Regge symbol
\[\begin{pmatrix} j_1 & j_2 & j_3 \\ j_4 & j_5 & j_6 \end{pmatrix}
\longrightarrow \begin{bmatrix} 
-j_3 + j_4 + j_5 & j_2 + j_4 - j_6 & j_1 + j_5 - j_6 & j_1 + j_2 - j_3 \\
-j_2 + j_4 + j_6 & j_3 + j_4 - j_5 & j_1 - j_2 + j_3 & j_1 - j_5 + j_6 \\ 
-j_1 + j_5 + j_6 & -j_1 + j_2 + j_3 & j_3 - j_4 + j_5 & j_2 - j_4 + j_6 
\end{bmatrix}\]
where, without a transposition symmetry, the row and column permutations give 
\(3!\times 4! = 144\) symmetries.

Remarkably, the symmetries of the \(9j\) symbol are more direct [@jahnhope9jSymmetries];
they're the row, column and transpositions of the wigner symbol itself, except
with odd permutations taking on a sign which can be computed from the entries 
\((-1)^{\sum_i j_i}\).









